---
layout: post
title:  "The start of 2015"
---

So as I said I would blog regularily, and then I didn't. That's because
I'm a techy and while working and tweaking the blog I obviously broke it
and until now haven't really found the time to fix it. Just wasn't at
the top of my priority list because all solutions to blogging through
Github kinda sucked. Now that it is fixed, lets catch up.

## Settling in

I now have my own space here that I affectionately refer to as home :).
It's nice to get home from work. To relax at home. To be home.

## Boston and New York

January was mostly spent outside of the country. I was in Boston and New
York for two weeks to work with our teams there, hold workshops, putting
names to faces and getting to know people. I had a blast, it was a great
two weeks.

## Puppet Camp Amsterdam

Obviously staying in the conutry for more than 24 hours wouldn't be fun
so shortly after arriving back from New York I zipped off to Amsterdam
and held a talk called
[Manifests of Future Past](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pOHQL0Nw2jo).

I spent the rest of the week in The Netherlands visiting friends and
family and working remotely.

## Fixing the blog

Recently [HubPress](http://hubpress.io) has launched and so far so
awesome. Still debating between HubPress and sliced bread. It takes a
bit getting used to blogging in AsciiDoc and the editor in HubPress
itself can be a bit quirky at times. That said AsciiDoc does give me
more control over my content and the rendering thereof and the split
view editor with content on one side and the rendered version on the
other is just fantastic.
