---
layout: post
title: "Directory Services 101: Introduction"
categories: tech
---

In this series of posts I want to talk about directory services. The
directory allow you to model things like people, computers, groups and their
relationships in a central database. This service can then be used for
authenticating users, managing group memberships and a whole lot more.

In many small environments people avoid the perceived complexity of directory
services over manually managing and provisioning groups and users in systems.
Though this can work really well, even on a small scale this can get annoying.
Helpfully a lot of software can integrate with directory services but it does
require actually being able to operate such a service. Though this is not
an inherently complicated thing to do, the lingo, the lackluster documentation
and a general belief that this is only for "big corporate" makes people shy
away from directory services.

In this series of posts I hope to be able to teach you the basics of
directory services. This will include things like terminology you'll run into,
the basic concepts, some architectural advice, setting up an OpenLDAP server
and how to configure it paired with some practical recommendations. Hopefully
at the end of this you'll be able to run a directory service even for a small
environment like at home, a lab setting or a small startup while reaping its
benefits.

This series is, or will be, made up of the following posts:

* [Introduction](/2017/07/02/ldap-101.html)
* [Terminology](/2017/07/02/ldap-terminology.html)
* [Basic concepts](/2017/08/26/ldap-basics.html)
* [Designing the DIT](/2018/10/26/ldap-designing-dit)
* [Setting up an LDAP server](/2018/10/27/ldap-server-setup)
* [Securing your LDAP server](/2018/10/27/ldap-secure)
* [Writing and testing ACLs](/2018/10/27/ldap-writing-testing-acls)
